---
{"zotero-key":"LXK6MGM8","zt-attachments":["21498"],"aliases":["@BIM202M10T01 Overview of molecular mechanisms"],"keywords":null,"FirstAuthor":"[[ Anna Kuballa]]","tags":["source/video","Uni/BIM202"],"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/sources/kuballa2024-bim-202-m10-t01-overview-molecular/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---

# @kuballa2024BIM202M10T01OverviewMolecular

>[!Synth]  
>**Contribution**::  
>  
>**Related**:: 
>  

> [!Abstract]+
> Epigenetics is the study of chemical modifications to DNA that affect gene expression, playing a crucial role in understanding the complex relationship between genotype and phenotype.

> [!Info]
> title: BIM202M10T01 Overview of molecular mechanisms
> type:: Video 
> date:: 2024
> DOI:: 
> FirstAuthor:: 
> creators:: Anna Kuballa

> [!Links]+
>  | Incoming Links                        |
> | ------------------------------------- |
> | [[Cards/Epigenetics\|Epigenetics]] |
> 
{ .block-language-dataview}


[Zotero](zotero://select/library/items/LXK6MGM8) [attachment](<file:///Users/nathanmaxwell/Zotero/storage/M9A879RC/Kuballa%20-%202024%20-%20BIM202M10T01%20Overview%20of%20molecular%20mechanisms.pdf>)

> [!quote-yellow] (Page 7) yellow
> 
> Chromatin level  • Histone  modification  • Phosphorylation  • Methylation  • Acetylation
>
{ #8CJCX86KaM9A879RCp7}


> [!quote-yellow] (Page 9) yellow
> 
> • Enzymes which catalyse addition or removal of chemical groups  • Acetyl (-COCH3)  • Methyl (-CH3)  • Phosphate
>
{ #6EGGRCY8aM9A879RCp9}




## Transcript

Hello and welcome to the Epigenetics Learning Materials. This is 10.1 an overview of molecular mechanisms. My name is Dr Anna Koubala. We know that genotype affects phenotype and we've seen this throughout the diseases that we've been studying in this course so far. So we've seen many examples of where mutations to the DNA result in phenotypic changes. So for example, PKU or hemochromatosis or sickle cell disease. So here's an example of sickle cell disease where we have a normally shaped red blood cell or in the mutated sickle cell disease we have these sickle shaped red blood cells. So genotype that affects the phenotype. And we also know through studying the human genome sequence through that human genome project that we've discovered many genes that can determine the aging process and diseases. We know that genetic analysis can help us to provide a diagnosis and also to determine therapies that may be best suited to a particular individual. So using personalized medicine as an approach for therapy. But we also know that this genetic diversity that we see doesn't actually account for all phenotypes. So there are relatively few protein coding genes around between 20 and 22,000. We also know that diseases can't be explained by DNA alone. So not every disease that we see presented can purely be explained through specific DNA mutations. So we now realize that changes to the DNA are possible that affect the way that the DNA is expressed. So not necessarily a mutation to the sequence itself, but a chemical tag that affects the way that a gene can be expressed. Epigenetics really refers to a chemical modification to the DNA without actually changing the DNA sequence. So we have a change to gene expression, but not a mutation to the DNA. And even though our ability to analyze epigenetic changes really has improved and allowed us to study this over the last, say, 10 years or so, the idea of epigenetics was actually developed a while ago. So Conrad Weddington in 1942 floated this idea of epigenetics. And he described it as an unfolding of developmental programs and processes from an undifferentiated zygote. If we think about the epigenetic landscape, we can imagine that the cells within a very early embryo, so within the first few days after fertilization, these are totipotent cells, which means that these cells can divide into any cell of the human body, including the placenta, so they can divide into either the trafectoderm or the inner cell mass. If we imagine that these cells are like a marble that's at the top of a hill, the marble can then roll down many different paths or troughs down the hill. And as the marble rolls down the hill, it then develops more and more specialization. So the very first specialization or differentiated state from totipotent is pluripotent. So pluripotent means that the cells that have formed the inner cell mass within our blastocyst can now no longer develop into the trafectoderm, so not develop into the placenta. So that's our very first level of specialization. Then these pluripotent cells within the inner cell mass will start to become more and more differentiated. So they can turn into a blood cell or a neuron or a muscle cell or a skin cell or a liver cell or any other cell within the human body, except they can't form the trafectoderm anymore. So we see this differentiation and specialization of cells as we roll down the hill. And so if you imagine as the marble is rolling, it starts to accumulate some mud or dirt, and this mud or dirt can be indicative of the type of epigenetic tags that we pick up along the way. Another analogy that we can use to think about the differences between genetics and epigenetics is to think about how computers work. So if you know anything about computers, we've got hardware and we've got software. So the hardware are all the physical things that you accumulate with your computer. A monitor or your hard drive or the processor or the mouse or the keyboard or the printer, whatever it happens to be, all the physical components of the computer. And we can think about this as being like the DNA sequence within our cells. The software on the other hand, you might purchase, say Microsoft Office or if you're an Apple user, you'll have other software and there are different versions of that with the Microsoft suite. You've got Windows 7, you've got Windows 10, you've got Windows XP, all different kinds of software that you can use on your hardware. So the software can be thought of as being the little epigenetic changes that occur to the DNA. We now realise that changes to the DNA are possible and that this affects the way that the DNA is expressed. And even though epigenetics is still a fairly young science and we don't completely understand it, we do know that these changes can last throughout a person's lifetime and that they can also be passed on to the next generation. So it's no longer nature versus nurture, it's nurture that's affecting nature and we're starting to understand this at the molecular level. So we can think about epigenetics as being non-DNA inheritance. And this means that the sequence of DNA doesn't actually change but access to the DNA changes biochemically and that this altered DNA can be passed down to children and even to grandchildren. So the word epigenetics essentially means above genetics and it's where we look at heritable changes in gene expression that don't involve changes to the DNA sequence. So it's possible to affect the phenotype without actually changing the genotype. So usually these epigenetic tags are stripped and then reprogrammed during gametogenesis, but not all of them. And so this is where we see that inheritance pass to the offspring. So the little image that I've got for you here on the side hopefully may help you to visualize how epigenetics works. So if we think about the stalk of grass that this little insect is sitting on as being the DNA sequence and the insect itself being the epigenetic tag, so the chemical modifications to that strand of DNA. So that if there's a bit of a breeze and the insect sitting on the blade of grass will affect the way that that blade of grass moves around, for example. Epigenetics is used throughout the body to regulate gene expression in all different cell types. And epigenetic modifications are really important for normal gene function. So we see that they're involved in many different aspects of normal cell development. We have an example of X chromosome inactivation. So here's an image over here of X chromosome inactivation. So this occurs of course only in females because females have two copies of the X chromosome. One of them needs to become inactivated because males only have one copy of the X chromosome. And in the very early stages of embryonic development, in fact all cells have both X chromosomes that are still active. And then at a certain point one of them, so it's a random decision within each cell, becomes inactivated. And you can see that inactivation here as this little blue ball that's tucked away in the corner while the other X chromosome remains active. It's also involved in the terminal differentiation of cells. So if we think about the different cell types in our body, liver cells, brain cells, skin cells and all the other cell types, they all have very specific and very different functions from each other. So it's important that every gene that's involved in that particular function knows when it needs to be turned on and turned off. And this is achieved through epigenetic modification. We also see this in not exactly identical monozygotic twins. So the image that I have here for you was taken from a website that had an image of one twin that was a smoker and the other twin that wasn't a smoker. So we studied just looking at the effects of smoking on epigenetic tags. And I wonder if you can pick by looking at the two images, which one you think was the smoker. And here we can see that the changes that occur over an individual's lifetime are then specific to the environment of that particular individual. So monozygotic twins are particularly useful for studying epigenetic changes. And if you have a close look, in fact, it was the twin on the right here that was the smoker. So epigenetic modifications are also associated with disease because when things go wrong, when the gene expression patterns change, this can lead to disease. So if we think about cancer development, tumor suppressor genes are usually turned on to suppress certain functions. But in the case of either a mutation, like we discussed in the topic of cancer genetics, or sometimes a change to the way that that gene is expressed, this under-regulation can drive to disease. So there are many steps that are involved in epigenetic modifications. We don't quite understand all of them, but really new insights into epigenetics will hopefully help to lead us to new treatments that can combat certain diseases that are associated with epigenetic changes. So we know that metabolic syndromes, so things like obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases, are associated with epigenetic changes that occur throughout the lifetime of that individual. In an earlier lecture, we discussed the importance of the regulation of gene expression because all cells in the body contain the same genetic information, but it's the ability to switch on and switch off gene expression that's really essential for cell differentiation. And we discussed in that lecture the opportunity for regulation at the chromatin level. So here we know that the tighter the chromatin is packed, the more difficult it is for a particular gene to be expressed. But in fact, there are actually three main opportunities for the control of gene expression. We see it occurring at the chromatin level, but we also see it occurring at the DNA level and also at the RNA level. Here is an overview of the three main mechanisms that initiate and sustain epigenetic change. So first, we can look at the chromatin level, and this is what we call histone modification. So if we look at chromosomes, we know that the chromosomes consist of DNA, strands of DNA, so that's the black in this image here, that is tightly coiled around these histone proteins. So the histone proteins all have little tails. So the tails are shown in the image here as the little dark blue squiggle. And on these tails, we can have different types of chemical tags. So we've got phosphorylation, methylation or acetylation that are all associated with modification of histones by attaching those groups to the tails. So mostly we will discuss methylation and acetylation here. Phosphorylation is less well studied. The next level is at the DNA level. So here we see methylation occurring at the sea base or the cytosine base on the strand of DNA itself. So the sea base then has a methyl group, and this occurs by enzymes that are involved with DNA methylation. So DNA methyl transferases, and we'll discuss this in a bit more detail later on. The third level is at the RNA level. So here we have non-coding RNAs that are associated with gene silencing, so microRNAs. So here is a diagram from Campbell Biology, figure 16.23, that really shows the packaging of chromosomes forming that chromatin structure. So we have our double-stranded DNA that you can see in this image here. So our double helix, and this double helix is wrapped around these histones. And in the image you can see that there are four different histones, and there are two of each, so that we have eight histone proteins all together when we look at it in a 3D sort of structure. And each of these histone proteins has this little tail that's sticking out, and it's on that tail that we can add our chemical tags. So we'll be talking about methylation or acetylation in this particular case. So changes to the chemical tags affect how tightly or how loosely the chromatin becomes packaged. And that affects then how easily a gene can become expressed. So here is a closer look at the histone modification. So this is that chromatin packaging. So we can see our DNA that is wrapped around the histone proteins. And again there are eight, so four altogether, four different ones, and there are two of each of those. And each of these have sites on the tails that are available for chemical modification. So there are three different types of chemical tags, but we'll again just be talking about acetylation and methylation. And depending on which chemical tag is present, that changes how tightly wrapped that chromatin is. So histone acetylation, so the acetyl groups, actually promote transcription. And this occurs because this allows the chromatin to open up, whereas histone methylation actually reduces transcription. And it does this by condensing the chromatin. So acetylation unwinds the DNA, if you like, and methylation wraps the DNA more tightly. So here is a little image just showing that in a little bit more detail. If we imagine that the gene that we're interested in is this little red region that's located on our double-stranded DNA. If the histone tails are methylated, which is in the top image here, the methyl groups that are attached to the histone tails, so the little green spots, actually wrap the chromatin up much more tightly. So that means the gene that we're interested in is all caught up within that chromatin structure and is not accessible. So the gene becomes inactive because all of the transcription machinery just can't get into that space. Whereas if the histone tails have acetyl groups on the end, then this loosens the DNA and allows transcription to occur. So you can see how accessible the gene is in the bottom image over here that allows that transcription machinery to access that particular location, allowing the gene to become active. So the more tightly coiled the DNA is, the harder it is to read or to be able to be expressed. This is an epigenetic activity from the Learn Genetics website from the Utah University. I'll put a link in the blackboard folder for you. So if we have a look at this, this is modelling what would happen in an experiment if we changed the epigenetic tags on a particular sequence of DNA. So here we're looking specifically at the gene that codes for green fluorescent protein. So this is a gene that switches on this fluorescent protein that glows green in the dark. And we can see that in this particular case, the DNA is very tightly coiled. So this chromatin modification has a lot of methyl tags. And you can see there's a lot of green spots all over the histone tails in this particular case. The histones are blue. The tails are these little bits that stick up. And it's the double stranded DNA that is coiled around the histones that is labelled in yellow. So a lot of methyl tags meaning that the chromatin is tightly coiled and really showing very little of that green fluorescent protein mRNA being expressed. And therefore very little of the actual green fluorescent protein itself being expressed. So very down regulated. Now if I turn the dial to slowly start to open up that chromatin, what you can see is that as the chromatin becomes less coiled, we have slightly more mRNA being expressed and then therefore more protein present. And you can see this is a cell over here on the far right. And the colour of the cell will start to change as we see higher levels of green fluorescent protein being expressed. So the less tightly coiled or the looser this DNA becomes, the more mRNA is being produced, the more protein is being produced and therefore the more of that green fluorescent protein is actually seen within the cell. So now you can see no methyl tags at all and quite a lot of the acetyl tags that are present on the histone tails indicating that the chromatin is very loose now. So the DNA is more unwound. And if I turn the dial back again in the other direction, you can see the reduction in mRNA production and the reduction therefore in the protein that is being expressed right until going back to that tightly coiled structure. This is a snapshot of the different levels of gene expression that we just saw. So we demonstrated that the tighter the coiling of the chromatin, the less mRNA is being transcribed and then therefore the lower the amount of protein that is being translated. And this is also associated with the methyl group. So you can see these little green spots. These represent methylation on those histone tails. There's quite a lot of methylation here. As we begin to uncoil that DNA, we can see that there are fewer methyl groups attached to those histone tails. We can see more transcription and more translation occurring. And then eventually we can begin to see some acetylation occurring on the histone tails. So here we already see that the DNA is quite uncoiled and this also is reflective of the amount of mRNA that's being transcribed, the amount of protein then that is being produced. And we also see that the level of green fluorescent protein within the entire cell is much brighter than we saw when the DNA was tightly coiled. Now we can take a closer look at X chromosome inactivation. So X chromosome inactivation happens only in females because females have two copies of the X chromosome and this needs to match with males that only have the one copy of the X chromosome. So in females one X chromosome will become inactivated. And the way that this happens is very early on in embryonic development, actually both X chromosomes are still active within the early female embryo. By about day four, so when there's roughly 100 cells within that embryo, one of the X chromosomes in each cell will randomly become inactivated. So there are two copies of the X chromosome, one paternal copy, one maternal copy. One of these will randomly become inactivated, leaving only the one active X chromosome. And because there are roughly 100 cells within this stage of embryo, whichever copy of the X chromosome becomes inactive in that particular cell, this inactivated X chromosome will be passed on to all subsequent daughter cells. So with every cell replication or cell division, the same X chromosome will always be inactivated. So the mechanism of inactivation is through histone modification. So we just saw how adding the methyl groups will cause the chromatin to become more condensed, but it also occurs via DNA methylation. So we have the two mechanisms here for X chromosome inactivation. And the pattern is then passed on to all subsequent daughter cells so that if we have a population and in one of the cells, the paternal copy is active. And in the other cell, the maternal copy is active. All of the daughter cells will have the same X chromosome that is inactivated. And this then means that different cells of the body will have different X chromosomes that are inactive. And just an example, so this isn't a real coloring obviously, but just to show you how this would look on the surface of the skin here, we can see patches of green and patches of red. So this is just designed to represent which X chromosome is active in a particular group of cells. DNA methylation is the covalent addition of a methyl group. And we see the regulation of DNA methylation as really being essential to the normal functioning of a cell in somatic cells, in gametes, and also in the embryo. And there are several different types of DNA methyl transferases. And these enzymes are different to the methyl transferases that we see in histone modification. So in DNA methylation, we have the DNA methyl transferase 1. And this acts to maintain methylation because it's important to pass exactly the same methylation patterns onto daughter cells during cell division. And the enzyme DNA methyl transferase 3, this is associated with new methylation. So what we see is in eukaryotes that methylation, so the addition of a methyl group, occurs on the C base, so on cytosine. And it occurs at these specific locations that we call CPG islands. So what this means is if we have a DNA sequence, wherever you have a C and then a G next to it, there is an opportunity for methylation there. So the methylation occurs to the fifth carbon of that cytosine base, and it only occurs wherever there is a G base located next to it in the genome. DNA methylation is currently one of the most well understood epigenetic modifications. And really DNA methylation is a common regulatory mark that's found in many different cell types. And this occurs as we just saw on the fifth carbon of the cytosine base. So DNA methylation is essential really in genomic imprinting, gene expression regulation, X chromosome inactivation, and also in embryonic development. And the epigenetic mark of DNA methylation, it can either activate or repress gene transcription at specific sites within the genome based on the methylation level. And the methylation level really occurs mostly at promoter regions. So hypermethylation at promoters can block the access of transcriptional machinery and therefore inhibit gene expression. And hypomethylation can facilitate gene activation because this results in an increased accessibility of DNA by that transcriptional machinery. So the inactivated X chromosomes that we see are often more methylated than regions of actively transcribed DNA. And individuals genes are more heavily methylated if they're not being transcribed. So removal of the methyl groups can then upregulate gene expression. It's really important for a gene that should be methylated to continue to stay methylated. So there's a group of enzymes called the DNA methyl transferase 1 group that are associated with the maintenance of methylation. So in other words, once DNA replication occurs, exactly the same regions of the genome must continue to be methylated. So this means that methylation patterns are inherited. If we think about two different types of inheritance here. One where we have from the cell to its daughter cells. And if we take the example of tissue differentiation, where just say we have a liver cell that has a particular methylation pattern in order to be able to function as a liver cell. So these specialized patterns need to be maintained when that liver cell divides to form two daughter liver cells. So specialized tissues need to keep this chemical record, if you like, that occurs during embryonic development. So we go from our fetus to an adult maintaining those specialized tissue types and therefore maintaining those methylation patterns. The other type of inheritance that we see with methylation is in genomic imprinting. So this is where there is methylation that occurs in the parent that is then passed down to the offspring. And this can either be specifically to the maternal genome or to the paternal genome. So in other words, there are some genes that have a certain maternal methylation pattern and there are other genes that have a specific paternal methylation pattern. And this occurs regardless of the sex of the embryo. And this is just associated with which particular genes are necessary to be switched on and switched off. We'll now move on to gene expression regulation through non-coding RNAs. So we know that the protein coding component of the human genome is about 1 to 2% of all of the DNA within the human genome. So in fact, most of the genomic DNA is not protein coding, but a lot of it is really important for the regulation of gene expression. So regulation of gene expression can occur through both large and also through small non-coding RNAs. And these non-coding RNAs are important for X chromosome inactivation. Also, they're important in re-establishing methylation patterns that form during gamete formation. And they can also block gene expression. They can do this either by degrading the RNA or by preventing that translation to protein. One type of small non-coding RNA that's able to regulate gene expression is the micro RNA. So this is a little bit of revision for you from a previous lecture. So micro RNAs are small, roughly 22 nucleotides long, non-coding single-stranded RNA molecules, and they're involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of roughly 30% of protein coding genes. So this is quite a large proportion. And their effect is to down-regulate, or you might have heard the term knock down or knock out. So they down-regulate target gene expression. And they do this by, if you have a look at the image here, we've got our target DNA strand. This is then transcribed into mRNA and translated into a protein product. What the micro RNAs do is that they actually bind to our transcribed mRNA, and they then prevent the translation of this mRNA into a protein.
