---
{"zotero-key":"ZVYZRGGV","zt-attachments":["18345"],"alias":", @BIM263 M10T01 Drug Discovery and Lead Identification","keywords":[],"FirstAuthor":"[[ Asmaa Boudridi]]","tags":["source/video"],"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/sources/boudridi-bim-263-m10-t01-drug/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---

# boudridiBIM263M10T01Drug

>[!Synth]  
>**Contribution**::  
>  
>**Related**:: 
>  

> [!Abstract]+
> 

> [!Info]
> title: BIM263 M10T01 Drug Discovery and Lead Identification
> type:: Video 
> date:: 
> DOI:: 
> FirstAuthor:: 
> creators:: Asmaa Boudridi

> [!Links]+
>  | Incoming Links |
> | -------------- |
> 
{ .block-language-dataview}


[Zotero](zotero://select/library/items/ZVYZRGGV) [attachment](<file:///Users/nathanmaxwell/Zotero/storage/WCPM2AB7/Boudridi%20-%20BIM263%20M10T01%20Drug%20Discovery%20and%20Lead%20Identification.pdf>)



## Transcript

Hi, my name is Esme Aguafrede and just before we start I would like to acknowledge the Gabi Gabi people who are the traditional custodians of the land on which I'm recording my presentation today. I acknowledge their continuing connections to country and pay my respect to eldest past, present and emerging. So this week's module is about drug discovery. So it will be divided into two sections. The first one will introduce drug discovery and we talk about lead discovery identifying and looking for that active compound at the very early stage of drug discovery. And the second section will talk about lead modification or chemical modification. So at the end of this week or this module we will be able to define some drug discovery terminology looking at some terms specific used in drug discovery. We will expand and apply the drug design during the lab as well. So we'll be looking at different ways to apply drug design and then we'll look a little bit further into that during the lab session. And finally we'll focus a little bit more on bioavailability of a molecule. Probably seeing those plants and those molecules and maybe the name of the molecules you've already heard of them either used as medicine or as drugs in the street. So let's just start by the first example and I apologize for my really bad pronunciation of the scientific name of plants. I haven't done Latin so I'm really terrible at it. Okay let's start in 1633 where the Chin Sinchona Calisaya, this plant here was introduced to Europe from expedition that was happening in Central and South America. So South American Indians used to use the bark extract of this plant to treat chills and fever. But once the European had it in Europe they used it as well against fever but as well as malaria against malaria. We had to wait until 1820 for the active ingredient, quinine, to be isolated and the structure determine and it is used as an anti-malarial drug. The second plant that we have here is probably one of the most known plants probably in the whole world. It's called Papava somniferum also known as opium poppy. So we know that opium poppy has been used for a very long time and I'm going to ask you do you know who and when the therapeutic properties of opium juice was described for the first time. That was Theofrastis iga that described the properties of opium juice in the 3rd century BC. So he mentioned it as used as an analgesic agent. So the opium poppy contains morphine and codeine as we know them today. So morphine is used as an important analgesic agent while codeine is used now as a cough suppressant. This is a foryxillum coca. So the leaves of this plant were chewed by workers in the high Andean mountains for their stimulant and euphoric properties due to the molecule cocaene that we know of. So as we can see here, access to natural resources to plant and part of plants have been used for thousands of years to treat illnesses. But we had to wait at about 100 or 150 years ago to know the active components of those plants. 1982 was an important year. It had changed lives of thousands of people. That's the year of discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming. So when Fleming came back to his lab after being away for a few days, he found a green mold growing in a culture of staphylococcus that he had left on the bench rather than putting it away in the fridge or in the bathroom. And that the bacteria between the mold and the bacteria had laced. So that got his interest in what was happening in that petri dish. So he tried many times to reproduce the phenomenon, but he couldn't succeed. Not until his colleague Dr. Hare came and linked a few observations that were happening at that time. So the story how Dr. Hare got to reproduce the observation and that phenomenon is quite fascinating. And the whole discovery of penicillin is a combination of black and weather, because that was happening in summer, so that was a bit humid. And the fact that the lab below where Fleming was studying, he was doing his research, that lab below him, below his lab, where he was studying mold. So there was force of mold that travelled from that lab to his lab. And also the fact that Fleming had forgotten the dish away and he didn't put it away. So that's a combination of few, I guess, phenomenon that contribute to the discovery of penicillin. So the structure of penicillin wasn't elucidated until 1944 by X-ray. And that was done by Dorothy Hodgkin. So since then few penicillins, excuse me, since then few penicillin structure were isolated, but only two of the early ananolids are still in use. We have penicillin G, as you can see here, and penicillin V. So you can see the structure here, that I'm highlighting, is the same. So we have only this part, but it's different. So penicillin G has poor oral bioavailability properties and is unstable in acid. So usually penicillin G is given intravenously as a salt. And because of that instability of penicillin G in acid, penicillin V, or as we know it, amoxilin, is used for oral administration, as a solution. What we have seen so far in the last couple of slides, that's what we call drug discovery without rational design. That means that things were discovered basically based on observations from previous people, what they use in traditional medicine, or by accident, I'd say. This picture or graph represents exactly what I'm talking about, the discovery without rational design. So the Hof made this caricature about Dr. Moore and him conducting experiments to test the theory of things discovered by accident. So that's really, this summarizes the last couple of slides basically. I quite like it. So what we see here is the modern rational drug design that we have been using for many years now to find new drugs. And usually it starts in the lab looking for the active compounds or the targets of a certain disease, let's say. So here we start around, I don't know, maybe 10,000 compounds probably. Then you get a certain compounds that pass this first step. So you take them to the next step, which is the preclinical development, where all the essays around pharmacology, toxicity and formulations are done. And then very few compounds take it to the next step, the clinical development, where we do the phase one to phase three of clinical trials. And finally, if we're lucky, we get one compound that make it through all this process and get sent into approval or submission to government bodies or similar for an essay. So this step here or this design here, it's called the value of death, because not many compounds make it to the end. And usually you get a big, big number of compounds at the very beginning they get eliminated. Okay, so if we're lucky, we get that one compound making it to the end. But most of the time it's a process that takes a long time. And here we're talking about years. So we're talking about, I don't know, 15 to 20 years from the drug discovery step to the final regularity approval. If we have a closer look at the drug discovery step in here, there are a few sub steps I would call them. So the first one is the drug target selection. The second one will go into a lead discovery. So looking at that compound that shows interesting activity. And finally, lead modification. So that's looking at modifying the structure of that lead compound to either reduce the toxicity or improve the activity or we'll be talking about physical chemical properties a bit later. So I would be today focused on those lead discovery and lead modification because I've worked in that area. Newman and Craig published a review in 2016 pointing out the origin of approved drugs between 1981 and 2016. So more than half of the drugs that have been approved then, there were in total 1328. So more than half of that exactly 549 were from a natural origin or derived from a natural compound. So most of those approved drugs were isolated or derived from an isolated compound. So natural products have been used in many years like we just saw before as drugs or as medicine. And the reason is mainly of their 3D shape in space. So a molecule that has a 3D shape is more likely to fill a pocket of protein to deactivate that protein compared to a synthetic compound. So most synthetic compounds are flat or planar. So the activity is reduced and they kind of inhibit basically nearly everything. We'll be seeing it in the lab. We'll be talking about that in the lab. So this is a graph that I generated from a paper by Linnington where he reviewed the number of new compounds isolated between 1941 and 2015. Those compounds were isolated from either a microbial or a marine sources. They are not including plants. And he found that from 1940 to 1970, there were very few new compounds isolated. And this was probably due to the fact that people either were not interested in natural product or the limitation of analytical techniques to establish the structure of a compound. And it's not until mid-80s that there was an advance in analytical chemistry like HPLCs and NMR which improved the rate of newly discovered compounds. So we know that if we have a new compound, it could relate to probably a new activity. So there is a lot of work towards identifying new or novel compounds that could bring a new activity to the table. I couldn't have done a lecture in drug discovery and not talk about aeribulin. So aeribulin is a compound that was derived from a marine natural product isolated from a sponge. It took about 30 years between when it was discovered the first time to when it was approved as an anti-cancer. So aeribulin marketed as halavin is an anti-cancer against refractory breast cancer. And it's one of the most complex natural product that was ever synthesized. And it combined academia, industry and government to work all together to make this product available. Let's have a look at a quick history of this compound and how it all started and all the steps until it got approved. So it's all started in 1986 when a Japanese research group isolated Halicondrine B with other compounds within the same series with like the structure was related to Halicondrine B. So they isolated this series of compounds from a Japanese sponge, marine sponge. And the reason why it was interesting is because they showed a very interesting activity, especially Halicondrine B that we can see here on this slide. It had a very potent cytotoxic activity against a melanoma line with an IC50 of 90 picomolar. So it's really, really small concentration to give a very potent activity. So as most groups sometimes working on the same class of compounds, Kishi had developed or proposed a proposal to synthesize Halicondrine B. So it's believed that he knew about the structure before 1986 when it was published. So his proposal wasn't to make or synthesize a drug candidate. It was just a proof of concept in terms of synthetic chemistry technique where he wanted to prove that this kind of complex molecules, especially with those furane and purine rings that you can synthesize them. Yeah, so this compound has 32 caro centers. So when you synthesize something with a lot of caro centers, it's really, really hard to maintain that carotid throughout all the synthetic pathway. So yeah, his proposal was actually accepted a few years later. We're going to be seeing that in the next slide. So in 1991, the NCI, National Cancer Institute in the US, published their results in 1991 around the mechanism of action of Halicondrine B. So other times they were interesting in the molecule working on it in parallel to Kishi's proposal. So they proposed or they published their results around the mechanism of action of Halicondrine B as an anti-cancer. So they showed that actually it has an interaction with tubulin and the molecule Halicondrine B will go and bind to a site closer to tubulin, making kind of destabilization of the tubulin macromolecule. Yeah, so they were quite interesting. They published their results in 1991 and they wanted to keep going with the development of Halicondrine B as an anti-tumor agent. However, by that time there wasn't much supplies of Halicondrine B because it's an extracted, it's a natural product isolated from a sponge. And we know that it's not easy to just go and grab sponges and isolate compounds from them. So in 1992, Kishi's synthesis proposal that he made in 1987 was accepted and he was working on it on the total synthesis of Halicondrine B. In the meantime, the NCI group in the US kept working on the development of this compound in a preclinical development. So they made an announcement to all the natural product community asking them if anyone had sponges making Halicondrine B that they were interested in and it was showing an interesting activity. So a New Zealand group had answered to NCI in around 1995 saying that they have a sponge that can be found at about 200 meter depths of the east coast of South Ireland in New Zealand, that they could harvest and make it as like a aquaculture, a sponge aquaculture. So they got approved to do that. So they got funding, they got about 300,000 American dollars and they started their sponge culture between 1998 and 1999. So the proposal was to grow around 1000 kilograms of sponge. So they used muscle farms at about only 10 to 30 meter depth and they got sponges producing up to 50% Halicondrine B of the original sponge. So they ended up getting around 300 milligrams at 98% pure and that kept them going in their in vitro and in vivo essays. So still around 1998, NCI in New Zealand were working on compounds isolated from the sponge that they were related to Halicondrine B with different tail parts. While Keishi had joined or started a group called ERI, not from Harvard where he was doing the total synthesis of Halicondrine B as well as different derivatives. So by then he had made about 200 derivatives with different structural modification of Halicondrine B, 200 to essay them. So around by early 2000s, the groups joined all together. So NCI and ERI joined together and they started their phase one clinical study. So during that process of structure activity relationship, they found that, just getting my point that they found that if you replace the Pyrrhan group by Phyrran group and you get this kind of amino derivative, you replace this long tail with an amino derivative substituent, it increased the activity of this compound and it's more effective as the companion to the precursor Halicondrine B. So they called this molecule areibulin. So in 2000s, there were all the clinical essays on areibulin and it hasn't been approved until 2010 by the FDA. So it's about 30 years of collaboration between academia around the world, industry partners and the government to make this compound available as an anti-cancer. I am a natural product chemist. I did my PhD in marine natural product and my postdoc at Griffith University at the Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, working on isolating or identifying active compounds that we could develop into drugs further. So the institute focuses on the very early stages of drug discovery, so that lead identification and need modification. The institute is interested in compounds from nature and they use nature bank. So that's a facility that has plants and marine organisms, mainly collected from Queensland and the project or the institute was funded by AstraZeneca in the 90s. So the idea is to collect nearly every single plant and marine organism in Queensland, but they also have plants or what we call biota from different regions as well. So today, application I will be talking about what I have done during my PhD and during my postdoc that reflect on drug discovery and link what we have seen in theory to what I have applied in the lab. Metabolomics aims to study the whole metabolome. It's every single compound in a specimen. It has a wide range of applications like chemotaxonomy. It's used in environmental influences in agriculture and it's often used to identify known compounds or to characterize a class of compounds. So if we want to progress from metabolomics, which is the study of the whole metabolome to drug discovery, we need to know the physical chemical properties of a compound that we are working with or compounds we are working with. So I believe that we can do that by knowing or using standards of known physical chemical properties to calibrate, let's say, HPLC column and then identify compounds of candidate drug quality. So here we talk about the physical chemical properties and I'm mainly talking about the orally bioavailable compounds. So those compounds to be orally bioavailable, they need to have a certain physical chemical properties and those properties were defined by Lipinski as a rule of five. So this rule is set for simple physical chemical properties and includes a molecular weight that needs to be less than 500 Dalton, a log P of a molecule that's going to be less or equal to five, number of H bond donors to be less or equal to five. And the number of H bond acceptors to be less or equal to 10. So we'll be using those, this terminology in the next few slides and look at how can we make a drug or how can we identify drug based on its physical chemical properties. Can it be orally bioavailable or not? So we just spoke about the log P. So what is a log P of a compound? So log P of a compound is a measure of its hydrophilicity. Okay, so that's a compound for compound to reach the site of action. It needs to travel and interact with different environments. So we have lipophilic environment, which are the membranes of cell and the AQ environment, which is either the inside or the outside of the cell. So the structure of membranes is primarily determined by the structure of the lipids that it is composed of. So those lipids are amphipathic, which means that they have one site or one end that is hydrophilic likes water. And the other part is hydrophobic or if you want lipophilic, that's the same different words explaining the same thing, which is insoluble in waters. It doesn't like water, but it's in, but it is soluble in organic solvent. And here we have a few examples. So we have the cholesterol, neutral cholesterol. That's one of the lipids found in membranes, or we have ionic phospholipids or glycol lipids. So to be able to determine the log P of a compound, the method that was used back then was to determine the solubility of that compound. In membranes, however, in the early 1960s, hash, who was an organic chemist, realized that most chemists wouldn't wouldn't do the test, wouldn't do the solubility of their compounds in membranes. That was, that took a bit of time and they wouldn't probably bother to do it because it was very limited. So he decided to look for something a bit different that any organic chemist back then would be able to do it quite easily and determine the log P of their compounds. So one of the models that he worked with, worked with, and that was the first step in drug action was the solubility of a compound in an organic solvent called one octanol. So that would simulate a lipid membrane that's organic solvent, compared to water. So you get like water, one octanol, and you determine the solubility of the compound in either. So if a compound was more soluble in water than in one octanol, that means that the log P will be positive. So there is an equation to calculate that log P based on the concentration in each. So if that log P was positive, that means that the compound is more lipophilic. If let's say a log P value was larger, that means that there will be an interaction of the drug with the lipid phase more than in the water. So that was a way for him to make the calculation of log P more accessible and more easier for organic chemists. Now, in those days, we don't need to do that in the lab. We use computers, we use programs to calculate the log P of compounds. Yeah. Alex, we studied the cause of attrition of oral drug candidates during the drug development process. So he calculated the physical chemical properties of more than 800 oral drug candidates. So he, those compounds were coming from big pharma companies like AstraZeneca, Illy-Lylim, GSK and Pfizer. And he started those compounds between 2000 and 2010. So he's almost to see the link, established the link between the physical chemical properties of those drug candidates and their compound attrition. So what I'm showing you here is the log P and the molecular weight only. I'll see if I can get my laser. So here what we have is the log P and here we have the molecular weight. So for drug to be orally bioavailable, which we spoke about earlier, it needs to have, it's need to follow the Lipinski rule of five. So there are four simple physical chemical properties. So first one will be the molecular weight, lesser equal to 500 Dalton, log P, lesser equal to five, H bond donors, lesser equal to five and H bond acceptors, lesser equal to 10. So the higher log P of a molecule, the lower its hydrophilicity, which means that it won't be able to be absorbed or will be poorly absorbed. So we don't want molecules with higher log P. So what Alex showed here is that there is a greater attrition for lipophilic and hydrophobic compounds because they have that lack of being absorbed easily. And that's more than 75% of the oral drug candidate have a log P less than five. So we're talking about all of those ones here and a molecular weight less than 500. So the majority of the drug candidates that they were being in development from those big pharma companies have the desirable range for being orally bioavailable. The other thing we can see here is that this is the, it's kind of a representation of the big metabolom space or the compounds that we have and then the drug space in here. So we know that molecules that they have or higher log P and high molecular weight, they present a higher drug attrition. While if we look at around log P less than five and molecular weight less than 500, we fit within the drug space. Okay, so those compounds here, they have low, low drug attrition while compound here, they are more likely to be developed as drugs because of their physical chemical properties and of course activity. So I worked at the Griffith Institute for drug discovery. The Institute was focused on the early stages of drug discovery, looking at compounds from synthetic libraries or from nature in order to find prospective drug candidate. So when I joined the team, they had already established protocol to enhance crude extract from biota, that could be marine or plant organisms. And so enhance them in compounds with drug like properties. So here we are talking mainly about molecular weight less than 500 and log P less than five. So the protocol uses dried biota and when I say biota that could be a part of a plant or it could be a fungi or it could be marine sponge, something that we're going to extract compounds from it. So we do classic extraction using methanol and DCM and we obtain a crude extract that is really rich in compounds. But those compounds could have molecular weight more than 500 and log P more than five. So to take or reduce that, those compounds, the crude extract is subjected to a solid phase extraction to take few compounds that we don't want to. So for example, the plant will go through PAG resin and the HLB resin while marine organisms will go through HLB only. So the PAG resin, it's a resin used to absorb tonnain and chlorophyll. That's why it's used only for plants. The HLB resin is a resin that it's used to enhance compound with log P less than five. So when compounds go through that resin, every compound that has a log P more than five get absorbed by that resin. So we won't end up having it in our crude extract. And then we do an HPLC. So the compound that's the crude extract that we have at the end here, it doesn't have any chlorophyll, tonnandose molecules there, high in molecular weight, but they also are rich in compounds with log P less than five. So the HPLC here, so that's a chromatography technique used to separate compounds. And it's basically used as a second filter to make sure that we are extracting only compounds with log P less than five. So here we're using it as an early stage of drug discovery to enhance those crude extract. So what we do after, we separate them into five fractions. So using standards, which I introduced earlier, standards with log P less than five will elude in the chromatographic here between two and seven minutes. So the compound here will be more likely to have a log P less than five. So we're interested in those compounds eluting between two and seven minutes. Okay, so if we have a look at projecting that HPLC step we are doing, we can see that between two and seven minutes we are within the drug space. And that's what we want. We want those fractions of crude extract to be rich in compounds within the drug space. So once we have those fractions rich in compound with log P less than five, so rich in drug-like compounds, we test them against any biological assay that we are interested in. At the same time, we are in anamar, proton anamar. So proton anamar detects every hydrogen in a compound. Okay, we know that most compounds will have hydrogen in them. So we use anamar as a fingerprint for each fraction. And like that, when we are isolating those compounds down the road, that will be used, the anamar will be used to make sure that every compound within that fraction has been isolated. So we'll be comparing every compound that we get, we compare it's anamar to the fractions. So we do that because some of those fractions will be active, not all of them. As an example, we'll be seeing in a couple of slides an example on the isolation using anamar and the log P. So here, let's say like for example, fraction two is the active fraction. So that will be the anamar of fraction two. So once we start isolating those compounds, which probably one of them is the active compound, we'll be using its anamar and the fraction two anamar to make sure that we isolated all the compounds before we go and test them again. So one of the projects that I worked on was tuberculosis. So a few years before I started, all the plants and marine organisms at Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery were fractioned, like we just saw into those five fractions. So there were fractions rich in drug-like compounds, and then they were tested against tuberculosis. And we got a list of active fractions. So we were interested in studying those active fractions. So this is an example of a biota that showed an activity, and only fraction three was active of that plant extract. So here we have an MIC of five micromolar for that fraction. That's pretty good. So we decided to isolate the compounds within this fraction. However, we don't know which compound is responsible for the activity. So for that, we want to make sure that we isolated every single compound from this biota, from this fraction. Okay, and then we can test them. So let's say we get like five or six compounds within this fraction. So once we isolate all of them and confirm the structure, confirm that they were within the active fraction, we go and test them and see which one was responsible for the activity. This is a comparison between fraction one and fraction five of the same biota. And then we can highlight it in red. That's the active fraction. So here we can see, for example, if we have some peaks within the same fraction, fraction three, they are within the same fraction four or two, but fraction four and two are not active. So we can predict that probably that compound is not responsible for the activity. Okay, so we'll be using fraction three as our fingerprint to isolate. That's what we call it, Anamar guided isolation. Okay, so the crude extract that I prepared and worked with was really rich in compounds. So I decided to make it a little bit less complex, basically. So I prepared a flash chromatography with the C18 stationary phase, sorry. And then I saw that fraction that came out at 40% methanol and the fraction that came out at 70% methanol had peaks similar or within the active fraction. Okay, so I used the Anamar again to confirm that I'm getting every single peak from fraction three in the other fractions I'm working with. And of course, doing a lot of larger scale isolation and isolating compounds using HPLC and Anamar to confirm, I found that I got three compounds that the signals are within the active fraction. So if we zoom in in this area just so we can see. So this is zoomed in between six or seven and eight ppm in the proton Anamar. And you can see every single peak that we have here correspond to, let's say a hydrogen. So for example, a hydrogen might have a doublet like here or might have a singlet which we don't have one here or might have like four signals related to it. That's something probably you do if you do analytical sciences, yo

u will talk about that. But that's how we determine the structure of compounds. So if I have a look at the different compounds that are isolated and we can see that the compound six, we can see the signals corresponding to compound six in fraction three, the active fraction. We can see compound seven, you see those signals here. And then you can see those signals here. And then we can also see these tiny compounds there. We can see the signals just there. So we made sure by comparing to the active fraction that those compounds are within the active fraction. Okay, and we want to make sure that we isolate every compound within the active fraction. So we determined, I determined the structure of those three compounds isolated. And then I calculated the log P for you guys so you can see how having that process of enhancing crude extract and fractions with compounds with log P less than five and molecular weight less than 500. How does it translate down that path when we obtain those structures? So for example, compound six had a log P of 2.8 and a molecular weight of two around 230 to 29. And you can see that even the H bond acceptor H bond donor are within the range of orally bioavailable compounds, their properties. Compound seven and compound eight had exactly the same thing. Log P less than five, molecular weight less than 500 and their bond, a number of H bond acceptors and H bond donors are within the same range of the Lipinski rule of five. So while I was doing my large scale isolation and purifying compound, I also isolated four other compounds. But rather than adding them to my list of compound to be tested, I checked the Anamar fingerprint of those compounds with the Anamar fingerprint of the active fraction. And I could identify that those four compounds were not within the active fraction. So we didn't need to test them again. So that reduced not only the number of tests, but also allowed us to look for those compounds within the active fraction rather than isolating and then going and testing them and then finding that they're not active. So going back and isolating more and going into a cycle of fractionation assay, fractionation assay. So we do an assay and then we fractionate. We make sure that we got every single compound within the active fraction and then we go and test them. And we know that those compounds will have a log P less than five and a molecular weight less than 500. So we know they have drug like properties in terms of physical chemical, yes, physical chemical properties. So here we go to the end of the first section of the module drug discovery. So we saw what is discovery and how successfully discovery contribute to the overall success of the drug discovery process. We also had to look at the importance of physical chemical properties of a drug, especially for all the bioavailable drugs. So the reason why medicines or drugs are preferred as orally bioavailable or taken orally is because it's a noninvasive way of administration. It's convenient and also it can be kept at room temperature without, you know, issues of storage. So that's why orally bioavailable drugs are preferred compared to other ways of administration. We had a look how we can use log P of a compound to determine the hydrophilicity of that specific drug and also that a drug that has a log P over five that it's poorly absorbed. So we need to focus a little bit more on that log P lowering the log P less than five if we want to develop a compound into an orally bioavailable drug. So the next section will be focused on lead modification. \[BLANK\_AUDIO\]

